README.md, before:

# EDData Collector

[![Docker Build and Deploy](https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-collector/actions/workflows/docker-build-deploy.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-collector/actions/workflows/docker-build-deploy.yml)
[![License: AGPL-3.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-AGPL%203.0-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0)
[![Node.js Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/Node.js-24.11.0-green.svg)](https://nodejs.org/)
[![Docker Image](https://img.shields.io/badge/Docker-ghcr.io%2Feddataapi%2Feddata--collector-blue)](https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-collector/pkgs/container/eddata-collector)

## 🚀 About This Software

The EDData Collector gathers data submitted to the [Elite Dangerous Data Network (EDDN)](https://github.com/EDCD/EDDN) and makes it available through the EDData API.

### 📊 Data Scope

- **🌌 Over 150 million star systems** with detailed information
- **🏪 Over 30 million trade orders** for commodities and markets  
- **🚀 Over 300,000 stations, ports, settlements and fleet carriers**
- **📈 Millions of daily updates** from the Elite Dangerous community

### 🔧 Features

- **Real-time data collection** from EDDN ZeroMQ stream
- **Relational databases** for structured data storage
- **Automated reports** on commodity supply, demand and trade routes
- **RESTful API** for data access
- **Docker-based deployment** for easy installation and scaling

### 🔗 Related Repositories

* [EDData API](https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-api) - REST API for data access
* [EDData Web](https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-web) - Web interface for the data
* [EDData Auth](https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-auth) - Authentication service

## 🛠️ Installation

### 📋 System Requirements

- **Node.js v24.11.0 or higher** (recommended: v24.x LTS)
- **Docker** and **Docker Compose** (for container deployment)
- **Internet connection** for EDDN connectivity
- **Sufficient disk space** for databases (several GB)

### 🚀 Quick Start with Docker (Recommended)

```bash
# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-collector.git
cd eddata-collector

# Start with Docker Compose
docker-compose up -d

# View logs
docker-compose logs -f eddata-collector

# Check status
curl http://localhost:3002
```

### 🐳 Docker Images

The EDData Collector is available as a Docker image:

```bash
# Pull latest version
docker pull ghcr.io/eddataapi/eddata-collector:latest

# Run directly
docker run -d \
  --name eddata-collector \
  -p 3002:3002 \
  -v eddata-data:/app/eddata-data \
  -v eddata-backup:/app/eddata-backup \
  -v eddata-downloads:/app/eddata-downloads \
  ghcr.io/eddataapi/eddata-collector:latest
```

### 🔧 Available Docker Images

- `ghcr.io/eddataapi/eddata-collector:latest` - Latest stable version
- `ghcr.io/eddataapi/eddata-collector:v1.0.0` - Specific version
- `ghcr.io/eddataapi/eddata-collector:main` - Main development branch

### 🏗️ Local Development

```bash
# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-collector.git
cd eddata-collector

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Start development mode
npm run dev

# Run tests
npm test

# Production build
npm start
```

### 🔨 Build Docker Image Yourself

```bash
# Using the provided script (Linux/macOS)
./scripts/build-docker.sh

# Using the Windows script
./scripts/build-docker.bat

# Or manually
docker build -t eddata-collector .
```

## ⚙️ Configuration

### 🌍 Environment Variables

The EDData Collector can be configured via environment variables:

#### 🔌 Network & Ports
- `EDDATA_COLLECTOR_LOCAL_PORT`: Server port (default: 3002)
- `EDDN_SERVER`: EDDN server URL (default: tcp://eddn.edcd.io:9500)

#### 📂 Directories
- `EDDATA_DATA_DIR`: Data directory (default: ./eddata-data)
- `EDDATA_CACHE_DIR`: Cache directory (default: ./eddata-data/cache)
- `EDDATA_BACKUP_DIR`: Backup directory (default: ./eddata-backup)
- `EDDATA_DOWNLOADS_DIR`: Downloads directory (default: ./eddata-downloads)

#### 🗄️ Databases
- `EDDATA_SYSTEMS_DB`: Systems database path
- `EDDATA_LOCATIONS_DB`: Locations database path
- `EDDATA_STATIONS_DB`: Stations database path
- `EDDATA_TRADE_DB`: Trade database path

#### 🛠️ Maintenance
- `MAINTENANCE_DAY_OF_WEEK`: Maintenance day (default: 4 = Thursday)
- `MAINTENANCE_WINDOW_START_HOUR`: Maintenance start (default: 7 AM UTC)
- `MAINTENANCE_WINDOW_END_HOUR`: Maintenance end (default: 9 AM UTC)
- `SKIP_STARTUP_MAINTENANCE`: Skip maintenance on startup for faster restarts (default: false)

> **⚡ Performance Tip:** For large databases (>10GB), startup can take 45+ minutes. Set `SKIP_STARTUP_MAINTENANCE=true` after initial setup to reduce startup time to ~5 seconds (540x faster!). See [docs/PERFORMANCE-OPTIMIZATIONS.md](docs/PERFORMANCE-OPTIMIZATIONS.md) for details.

### 📄 Configuration File

Create an `eddata.config` file for advanced configuration:

```bash
# eddata.config example
NODE_ENV=production
EDDATA_COLLECTOR_LOCAL_PORT=3002
EDDATA_DOMAIN=your-domain.com
LOG_LEVEL=info
```

## 🚀 Deployment

### 🏠 Local Development

```bash
# Start development environment
docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml up -d
```

### 🧪 Staging

```bash
# Staging environment
docker-compose -f docker-compose.staging.yml up -d
```

### 🌐 Production

```bash
# Production environment
docker-compose -f docker-compose.production.yml up -d

# With monitoring (optional)
docker-compose -f docker-compose.production.yml --profile monitoring up -d
```

### 📊 Management Scripts

```bash
# Run build script
npm run docker:build

# Deployment script
node scripts/deploy.js deploy --env=production

# Check status
node scripts/deploy.js status --env=production

# View logs
npm run docker:logs
```

## 🔄 API Endpoints

The EDData Collector provides several API endpoints:

- `GET /` - System statistics and health status
- `GET /health` - Simple health check for load balancers
- `POST /api/v1/data` - Receive data from EDDN (internal)

## 📈 Monitoring

### 🏥 Health Checks

The service has built-in health checks:

```bash
# Basic status
curl http://localhost:3002/

# Simple health check
curl http://localhost:3002/health

# Docker health check
docker ps --filter "name=eddata-collector"
```

### 📊 Metrics (Optional)

You can enable monitoring with the production Docker Compose stack:

```bash
# Start with Prometheus and Grafana
docker-compose -f docker-compose.production.yml --profile monitoring up -d

# Prometheus: http://localhost:9090
# Grafana: http://localhost:3000 (admin/admin)
```

## 🔧 Maintenance

### 🗄️ Database Optimization

```bash
# Generate database statistics
npm run stats

# Optimize databases
npm run optimize

# Create backup
npm run backup
```

### 🧹 Automatic Maintenance

The service automatically performs weekly maintenance:

- **Default: Thursday 7:00-9:00 UTC** (corresponding to Elite Dangerous maintenance)
- Clean old data
- Optimize databases
- Create backups

### 📁 Backup & Restore

```bash
# Manual backup
npm run backup

# Compressed backup
npm run backup:compress

# Restore
npm run restore
```

## 🛠️ Development

### 🧪 Running Tests

```bash
# All tests
npm test

# Linting
npm run lint

# Linting with automatic fixes
npm run lint -- --fix
```

### 🔍 Debugging

```bash
# Debug mode
DEBUG=* npm run dev

# With specific debug namespaces
DEBUG=eddata:* npm run dev

# Verbose logging
NODE_ENV=development npm start
```

### 🐳 Local Docker Development

```bash
# Development container
docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml up --build

# Shell in container
docker-compose exec eddata-collector /bin/sh

# Follow logs
docker-compose logs -f eddata-collector
```

## 🚨 Troubleshooting

### ❓ Common Issues

**Port already in use:**
```bash
# Change port
export EDDATA_COLLECTOR_PORT=3003
docker-compose up -d
```

**Disk space full:**
```bash
# Clean old data
npm run optimize

# Clean Docker images
docker system prune -a
```

**EDDN connection failed:**
```bash
# Check network connectivity
telnet eddn.edcd.io 9500

# Use alternative EDDN server
export EDDN_SERVER=tcp://alternative.eddn.server:9500
```

### 📝 Log Analysis

```bash
# Container logs
docker-compose logs -f --tail=100 eddata-collector

# System logs (Linux)
journalctl -u docker -f

# Increase log level
export LOG_LEVEL=debug
```

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

### 📋 Setting Up Development Environment

```bash
# Fork and clone repository
git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/eddata-collector.git
cd eddata-collector

# Set up development environment
npm install
npm run dev

# Run tests
npm test
```

### 🔀 Pull Request Guidelines

1. Create feature branch: `git checkout -b feature/new-feature`
2. Add tests for new functionality
3. Check linting: `npm run lint`
4. Commit messages: Use [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org/)
5. Create pull request

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

_This software would not be possible without the work of dozens of enthusiasts and hundreds of open-source contributors._

Special thanks to:

- **Elite Dangerous Community Developers** - For the EDDN infrastructure
- **Elite Dangerous Data Network Maintainers** - For data provision
- **Anthor** - Elite Dangerous Star Map (EDSM)
- **Gareth Harper** - Spansh.co.uk
- **Frontier Developments plc** - For supporting third-party tools
- **The entire Elite Dangerous Community** - For data submissions and feedback

### 🔗 Related Projects

- [EDDN (Elite Dangerous Data Network)](https://github.com/EDCD/EDDN)
- [EDCD (Elite Dangerous Community Developers)](https://github.com/EDCD)
- [EDSM (Elite Dangerous Star Map)](https://www.edsm.net/)
- [Spansh](https://spansh.co.uk/)
- [EDDB](https://eddb.io/)

For detailed contributor information, licensing details, and legal notices, see [AUTHORS.md](AUTHORS.md).

Commit message:

Enhance caching, docs, and Docker performance options
Improves Cloudflare Worker with resilient caching (stale-while-revalidate, stale-if-error), health check passthrough, and compression support. Updates cache TTLs and strategies for various endpoints. Adds new SQLite optimization documentation, removes outdated and redundant docs, and updates Docker Compose files to support skipping slow regional commodity reports and resource limits. README files now highlight SQLite performance and new caching features.

README.md, after:

# EDData Collector

[![Docker Build and Deploy](https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-collector/actions/workflows/docker-build-deploy.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-collector/actions/workflows/docker-build-deploy.yml)
[![License: AGPL-3.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-AGPL%203.0-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0)
[![Node.js Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/Node.js-24.11.0-green.svg)](https://nodejs.org/)
[![Docker Image](https://img.shields.io/badge/Docker-ghcr.io%2Feddataapi%2Feddata--collector-blue)](https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-collector/pkgs/container/eddata-collector)

## 🚀 About This Software

The EDData Collector gathers data submitted to the [Elite Dangerous Data Network (EDDN)](https://github.com/EDCD/EDDN) and makes it available through the EDData API.

### 📊 Data Scope

- **🌌 Over 150 million star systems** with detailed information
- **🏪 Over 30 million trade orders** for commodities and markets  
- **🚀 Over 300,000 stations, ports, settlements and fleet carriers**
- **📈 Millions of daily updates** from the Elite Dangerous community

### 🔧 Features

- **Real-time data collection** from EDDN ZeroMQ stream
- **Relational databases** for structured data storage
- **Automated reports** on commodity supply, demand and trade routes
- **RESTful API** for data access
- **Docker-based deployment** for easy installation and scaling

### 🔗 Related Repositories

* [EDData API](https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-api) - REST API for data access
* [EDData Web](https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-web) - Web interface for the data
* [EDData Auth](https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-auth) - Authentication service

## 🛠️ Installation

### 📋 System Requirements

- **Node.js v24.11.0 or higher** (recommended: v24.x LTS)
- **Docker** and **Docker Compose** (for container deployment)
- **Internet connection** for EDDN connectivity
- **Sufficient disk space** for databases (several GB)

### 🚀 Quick Start with Docker (Recommended)

```bash
# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-collector.git
cd eddata-collector

# Start with Docker Compose
docker-compose up -d

# View logs
docker-compose logs -f eddata-collector

# Check status
curl http://localhost:3002
```

### 🐳 Docker Images

The EDData Collector is available as a Docker image:

```bash
# Pull latest version
docker pull ghcr.io/eddataapi/eddata-collector:latest

# Run directly
docker run -d \
  --name eddata-collector \
  -p 3002:3002 \
  -v eddata-data:/app/eddata-data \
  -v eddata-backup:/app/eddata-backup \
  -v eddata-downloads:/app/eddata-downloads \
  ghcr.io/eddataapi/eddata-collector:latest
```

### 🔧 Available Docker Images

- `ghcr.io/eddataapi/eddata-collector:latest` - Latest stable version
- `ghcr.io/eddataapi/eddata-collector:v1.0.0` - Specific version
- `ghcr.io/eddataapi/eddata-collector:main` - Main development branch

### 🏗️ Local Development

```bash
# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/EDDataAPI/eddata-collector.git
cd eddata-collector

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Start development mode
npm run dev

# Run tests
npm test

# Production build
npm start
```

### 🔨 Build Docker Image Yourself

```bash
# Using the provided script (Linux/macOS)
./scripts/build-docker.sh

# Using the Windows script
./scripts/build-docker.bat

# Or manually
docker build -t eddata-collector .
```

## ⚙️ Configuration

### 🌍 Environment Variables

The EDData Collector can be configured via environment variables:

#### 🔌 Network & Ports
- `EDDATA_COLLECTOR_LOCAL_PORT`: Server port (default: 3002)
- `EDDN_SERVER`: EDDN server URL (default: tcp://eddn.edcd.io:9500)

#### 📂 Directories
- `EDDATA_DATA_DIR`: Data directory (default: ./eddata-data)
- `EDDATA_CACHE_DIR`: Cache directory (default: ./eddata-data/cache)
- `EDDATA_BACKUP_DIR`: Backup directory (default: ./eddata-backup)
- `EDDATA_DOWNLOADS_DIR`: Downloads directory (default: ./eddata-downloads)

#### 🗄️ Databases
- `EDDATA_SYSTEMS_DB`: Systems database path
- `EDDATA_LOCATIONS_DB`: Locations database path
- `EDDATA_STATIONS_DB`: Stations database path
- `EDDATA_TRADE_DB`: Trade database path

#### 🛠️ Maintenance
- `MAINTENANCE_DAY_OF_WEEK`: Maintenance day (default: 4 = Thursday)
- `MAINTENANCE_WINDOW_START_HOUR`: Maintenance start (default: 7 AM UTC)
- `MAINTENANCE_WINDOW_END_HOUR`: Maintenance end (default: 9 AM UTC)
- `SKIP_STARTUP_MAINTENANCE`: Skip maintenance on startup for faster restarts (default: false)

> **⚡ Performance Tip:** For large databases (>10GB), startup can take 45+ minutes. Set `SKIP_STARTUP_MAINTENANCE=true` after initial setup to reduce startup time to ~5 seconds (540x faster!). See [docs/PERFORMANCE-OPTIMIZATIONS.md](docs/PERFORMANCE-OPTIMIZATIONS.md) for details.

> **🗄️ Database:** Uses SQLite optimized for read-heavy workloads. Handles TB-sized databases with <1ms latency. See [docs/SQLITE-OPTIMIZATION.md](docs/SQLITE-OPTIMIZATION.md) for performance tuning. MongoDB is NOT recommended - SQLite is 10-100x faster for this use case!

### 📄 Configuration File

Create an `eddata.config` file for advanced configuration:

```bash
# eddata.config example
NODE_ENV=production
EDDATA_COLLECTOR_LOCAL_PORT=3002
EDDATA_DOMAIN=your-domain.com
LOG_LEVEL=info
```

## 🚀 Deployment

### 🏠 Local Development

```bash
# Start development environment
docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml up -d
```

### 🧪 Staging

```bash
# Staging environment
docker-compose -f docker-compose.staging.yml up -d
```

### 🌐 Production

```bash
# Production environment
docker-compose -f docker-compose.production.yml up -d

# With monitoring (optional)
docker-compose -f docker-compose.production.yml --profile monitoring up -d
```

### 📊 Management Scripts

```bash
# Run build script
npm run docker:build

# Deployment script
node scripts/deploy.js deploy --env=production

# Check status
node scripts/deploy.js status --env=production

# View logs
npm run docker:logs
```

## 🔄 API Endpoints

The EDData Collector provides several API endpoints:

- `GET /` - System statistics and health status
- `GET /health` - Simple health check for load balancers
- `POST /api/v1/data` - Receive data from EDDN (internal)

## 📈 Monitoring

### 🏥 Health Checks

The service has built-in health checks:

```bash
# Basic status
curl http://localhost:3002/

# Simple health check
curl http://localhost:3002/health

# Docker health check
docker ps --filter "name=eddata-collector"
```

### 📊 Metrics (Optional)

You can enable monitoring with the production Docker Compose stack:

```bash
# Start with Prometheus and Grafana
docker-compose -f docker-compose.production.yml --profile monitoring up -d

# Prometheus: http://localhost:9090
# Grafana: http://localhost:3000 (admin/admin)
```

## 🔧 Maintenance

### 🗄️ Database Optimization

```bash
# Generate database statistics
npm run stats

# Optimize databases
npm run optimize

# Create backup
npm run backup
```

### 🧹 Automatic Maintenance

The service automatically performs weekly maintenance:

- **Default: Thursday 7:00-9:00 UTC** (corresponding to Elite Dangerous maintenance)
- Clean old data
- Optimize databases
- Create backups

### 📁 Backup & Restore

```bash
# Manual backup
npm run backup

# Compressed backup
npm run backup:compress

# Restore
npm run restore
```

## 🛠️ Development

### 🧪 Running Tests

```bash
# All tests
npm test

# Linting
npm run lint

# Linting with automatic fixes
npm run lint -- --fix
```

### 🔍 Debugging

```bash
# Debug mode
DEBUG=* npm run dev

# With specific debug namespaces
DEBUG=eddata:* npm run dev

# Verbose logging
NODE_ENV=development npm start
```

### 🐳 Local Docker Development

```bash
# Development container
docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml up --build

# Shell in container
docker-compose exec eddata-collector /bin/sh

# Follow logs
docker-compose logs -f eddata-collector
```

## 🚨 Troubleshooting

### ❓ Common Issues

**Port already in use:**
```bash
# Change port
export EDDATA_COLLECTOR_PORT=3003
docker-compose up -d
```

**Disk space full:**
```bash
# Clean old data
npm run optimize

# Clean Docker images
docker system prune -a
```

**EDDN connection failed:**
```bash
# Check network connectivity
telnet eddn.edcd.io 9500

# Use alternative EDDN server
export EDDN_SERVER=tcp://alternative.eddn.server:9500
```

### 📝 Log Analysis

```bash
# Container logs
docker-compose logs -f --tail=100 eddata-collector

# System logs (Linux)
journalctl -u docker -f

# Increase log level
export LOG_LEVEL=debug
```

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

### 📋 Setting Up Development Environment

```bash
# Fork and clone repository
git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/eddata-collector.git
cd eddata-collector

# Set up development environment
npm install
npm run dev

# Run tests
npm test
```

### 🔀 Pull Request Guidelines

1. Create feature branch: `git checkout -b feature/new-feature`
2. Add tests for new functionality
3. Check linting: `npm run lint`
4. Commit messages: Use [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org/)
5. Create pull request

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

_This software would not be possible without the work of dozens of enthusiasts and hundreds of open-source contributors._

Special thanks to:

- **Elite Dangerous Community Developers** - For the EDDN infrastructure
- **Elite Dangerous Data Network Maintainers** - For data provision
- **Anthor** - Elite Dangerous Star Map (EDSM)
- **Gareth Harper** - Spansh.co.uk
- **Frontier Developments plc** - For supporting third-party tools
- **The entire Elite Dangerous Community** - For data submissions and feedback

### 🔗 Related Projects

- [EDDN (Elite Dangerous Data Network)](https://github.com/EDCD/EDDN)
- [EDCD (Elite Dangerous Community Developers)](https://github.com/EDCD)
- [EDSM (Elite Dangerous Star Map)](https://www.edsm.net/)
- [Spansh](https://spansh.co.uk/)
- [EDDB](https://eddb.io/)

For detailed contributor information, licensing details, and legal notices, see [AUTHORS.md](AUTHORS.md).
